Student Name: Emma Chen
Student ID: S003
GCSE PE Paper 1 - Energy Systems

Question 1: Describe the aerobic energy system (3 marks)

The aerobic system uses oxygen to create ATP energy. It takes place in the mitochondria of muscle cells. This system is used for activities like jogging or cycling that last more than 2-3 minutes at moderate intensity.

Question 2: Explain how the aerobic system is used during a marathon (4 marks)

A marathon takes about 2-4 hours to complete, so runners rely heavily on the aerobic energy system. The runner breathes oxygen which goes to their muscles through the bloodstream. In the muscles, the oxygen breaks down glucose and also uses fat stores to make ATP continuously. This provides steady energy for the whole race. Because marathons are run at a pace below maximum intensity, there's enough oxygen available so lactic acid doesn't build up.

Question 3: Evaluate the effectiveness of the aerobic system for different types of athletes (6 marks)

The aerobic system works very well for endurance athletes because it can produce energy for hours. Marathon runners and long-distance cyclists use mainly the aerobic system. It's effective because it doesn't create lactic acid like the anaerobic system does.

For sprinters and power athletes, the aerobic system isn't very useful. Sprinters need instant energy and the aerobic system is too slow - it takes minutes to fully start working. They use the ATP-PC system instead which is much faster.

The aerobic system makes lots of energy (38 ATP per glucose) which is an advantage. But the disadvantage is that it's slow to activate and doesn't produce power as quickly as anaerobic systems. So it's great for endurance but poor for explosive power.

Question 4: Define SMART targets and give an example (4 marks)

SMART stands for:
S - Specific (exactly what you want to achieve)
M - Measurable (you can measure it)
A - Achievable (it's possible)
R - Realistic (makes sense for you)
T - Time-bound (has a time limit)

Example: I will increase my maximum bench press from 40kg to 50kg in 8 weeks.

This is SMART because it's specific (bench press), measurable (40kg to 50kg), achievable and realistic (10kg in 8 weeks is reasonable), and time-bound (8 weeks deadline).

Question 5: Explain the difference between aerobic and anaerobic respiration (3 marks)

The main differences are: Aerobic needs oxygen but anaerobic doesn't. Aerobic makes 38 ATP from one glucose but anaerobic only makes 2 ATP. Aerobic is for longer activities at lower intensity, anaerobic is for short bursts of high intensity. Also, aerobic produces water and CO2, but anaerobic produces lactic acid which makes muscles hurt.
